---
layout: post
title: "Foundation Series"
tagline: "Analysis of the best Sci-Fi book"
showtitle: true
tags: [book, thoughts]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Have you ever read a book that speaks so accurately to your thoughts that you are convinced that the author is actually yourself? This series is that book for me (though decaying as the series progressed). The main motif of the series is 'psychohistory'. Coming across this term is like learning the name of colors for the first time. It's been an integral part of your life this whole time, but you didn't know how to convey it in words. And then one day, you come across the words, and it all makes sense; as if the words somehow give meaning to the physical concept (or in this case, theoretical notion). In brief, psychohistory is the application of statistics to society; the intersection of the cold, austere realm that is mathematics with the torture of a manic reality; finding equations, patterns in the chaos of life. Things of this nature have always fascinated me. Coincidentally, I had recently watched a [TED talk](http://www.ted.com/talks/jean_baptiste_michel_the_mathematics_of_history.html) about this very concept - though, there was no mention of Asimov, and it was a rather simplified application in a single arena (warfare). Comparatively, Asimov's ideas are so sweeping in their ambition and subtle in their beauty.

Somewhat related, Paul Krugman (the Nobel laureate in Economics) [said](http://www.wired.com/underwire/2012/05/paul-krugman-geeks-guide-galaxy/) that part of the reason for his decision to go into economics is because it is the closest thing to the field of psychohistory. I'm not sure if the way the field today is presented, whether or not it is a good reflection of the tenets of psychohistory. I think economics takes the basic ideas of psychohistory, but the aggregation step is severely flawed, and not based on statistics, but on grand assumptions that lead to incorrect conclusions. Econometrics, you would suppose, would be better than, but those people (do I include myself in this group?) are too focused on their statistical models of quantifiable things, like stock market prices; they are not applying their models to hard stuff like the people in the market. Is it even possible, they probably ask? But that is what Asimov dreamt of. The aggregated actions of human beings in deciding the fate of society as a whole - the rise and fall of civilisations. I am at once reminded of a beautifully worked podcast by Radiolab, on the topic of [cities](www.radiolab.org/2010/oct/08/). If my memory serves me well (it usually doesn't), the idea of treating cities as a living organism is actually a fruitful exercise (with their own decidely predictable life pattern). So if cities - the aggregation of citizens in a small environment - have common traits, a life and death cycle, even a unique 'pace' of life (listen to this highly recommended podcast for more information), then it's not a far stretch to continue this aggregation to the larger scope, even the largest scope, that of humanity. But then again, in cities, you have people like city planners, whose job is to ensure that the construction of the city is "optimal", whatever that means.

This brings us to the field of urban planning, which is one of those, on first impulse, completely mundane, but after further inspection, lends itself to a incredible depth and complexity. Like traffic? These people are sort of like the Second Foundation, in that they deal with the schema of society/cities.

***

Anyway, all this is beside the point. I believe that what made me tingle when reading the description of psychohistory is the statistical nature of the endeavor; a fictitious, but resounding, testament to the power of statistical thought in predicting and achieving the impossible: seeing the future. I used to find science fiction extremely boring - though I never actually sat down to read any books thoroughly, as I would naturally slide my way to the fantasy section of the bookstore. I still love fantasy, and I think fantasy is more accessible when you are young, and mystical creatures are the alpha species in your imagination, as opposed to robots. Science fiction, I thought, was too believable to sweep me away from reality in the way that fantasy could. Magic - out of this world. But as you grow older, and the need for imagination lessens, your interests realign. Life becomes less about leaving the world, but changing the world (obviously this depends on the status of your life - some people will obviously wish to hide from reality in their fictional tales). The gift that Sci-Fi writes have - being able to dream up the future - is such an important one, and I wish dearly to develop this muscle further. At the same time, Sci-Fi asks questions about mathematics/science that nobody dared to ask before (especially in the pitbull arena that is academia). It postulates the impossible, so that the possible may be more fantastical. Thus, (certain aspects of) Sci-Fi can be considered the crazy uncle of academia. But it's the crazy uncle that gives you the crazy idea that might just change the world.

Or not.

And then there's the small matter of free will and predestination. I say small because I think that the question of whether or not Seldon's theories removes free will is misguided. The law of large numbers, while it is generally considered bad practice (blasphemous) to apply the law to situations where $X_i$ are in any way related to humans, helps one to see that this is a common fallacy of assuming that properties sustain throughout the different levels of abstraction. I refer to Paul Davies' "God and New Physics":

> An appreciation of the holistic nature of life enables the old idea of life-force to be comfortably abandoned, for that too is based on level-confusion. The idea that some magical quality must be bestowed upon inanimate matter to ‘bring it alive’ is as misguided as to suppose that electrical switches must be given ‘computing power’ or ants endowed with a ‘colonial spirit’, before these systems can function collectively. If it were possible to construct artificially a complete bacterium by assembling the individual atoms in the appropriate pattern, there is no doubt that it would be every bit as alive as any ‘natural’ bacterium.

Conversely, just because the cumulative actions of the group are deterministic, doesn't force the individuals to be robots. Every dice in the long line of dice is entirely random, and yet we know for certain that the average of an approaching infinite number of dice will be 3. There's nothing creepy and deterministic about that.

# Spoiler Review

First off, Asimov's style of writing is extremely succinct and pithy. If you are of the verbose camp, then this is not for you. Second, forget character development. One of the most startling (and afterwards, liberating) features of his book is how short the (mental) screen-time of each character is. In part, this is because each book is actually a collection of short stories. But the (perhaps unintended) effect is that we quickly realize that the real characters of the series are the ideas and the factions. Just like how a human body replaces all it's cells, but remains the same entity throughout this process (or does it?), so too do the innards of the First and Second Foundation get replaced but remain the same. In most epic stories, the abstraction of the characters into ideals is a gradual process, or at the very least, one that is sprung upon the author towards the end. But this series is all about the abstraction.

The other feature of this series is the beautifully worked plot twists (a la Christopher Nolan).